# Abstract #

Neuronal dynamics unfold in the close vicinity of a second order phase transition. The distance to criticality is associated with various variations of computationally and cognitively central properties. Balancing these properties, the brain may adaptively and dynamically self-regulate this distance to criticality in a task-dependent manner. Short-term memory is dependent on the information storage and transmission capabilities of neuronal circuits, which may be optimized in close proximity to criticality – amongst other criticality-enabled short-term memory facilitative computational properties, which are reviewed. Recent intracranial evidence associates the hippocampus closely with short-term memory, consistent with two theoretical perspectives on the hippocampus: Specifically, first, the computation of a conjunctive representation of a temporally receding internal timeline of what happened when; and, second, the implementation of hippocampal short-term memory in terms of a nested theta-gamma code. In order to test whether the hippocampus dynamically and adaptively self-regulates the distance to criticality in a short-term memory task, neuronal recordings from the rodent hippocampal subregions CA1 & CA3 are analyzed with a sub-sampling invariant estimator. While an even smaller distance to criticality within the short-term memory task is not associated with an increased performance, the hippocampal distance to criticality is – in accord with expectations – dynamically reduced in the working memory task. Given that criticality is associated with universality – the idea that macroscopic dynamics are invariant with respect to changes in microscopic realization across diverse systems – the framework of criticality offers some hope with regards to inter-species generalizations.

